How might one implement a Kanerva memory as a two-layer perceptron?  The first
set of nodes would be the input pattern which serves as the address.  The
second (middle) set of nodes each would represent a hard location.  In the
first layer of connections, each set of weights leading into an address neuron,
together with its bias value, represent the address of the neuron and its
response radius.  This also determines the set of addresses it will respond to.

A few mathematical facts about this arrangement:

1. The weights and bias logically define a hyperplane that separates the input.

2. If we assume the input nodes have a bounded range of values (say [0, 1] or
[-1, 1]), then the hyperplane separates the input space into two finite
volumes.

3. The notion of an "address" connotes a neuron that fires for the smaller of
the two volumes, and when this space is only a small fraction of the total
volume.

4. A hyperplane equation wx + b = 0 and (w/|w|)x + b/|w| = 0 are equivalent.
That is, we can scale all weights and the bias by any non-zero factor, and the
resulting hyperplane will be the same.  Note, however, that if the neuron's
output is processed with ReLU, then the output of the ReLU function will also
be scaled.

5. Under the Kanerva interpretation, a neuron has a specific address, and has a
radius below which it fires.  Since the address is given as one of the corners
of the discrete {0,1}^n space, and distance is Hamming distance, this implies
that the direction vector defining the hyperplane is the one formed by the
vector from the center of the hypercube to the address.

6. Having defined the address and radius, we note that any pattern in the
convex hull of the discrete hypercube patterns that activate it will also
activate it.  (Indeed this is part of what a separating hyperplane does).



Now, what to do about Kanerva's counters?  In Kanerva's original formulation,
when a memory is stored, the following happens:

1. The memory system receives two inputs: an address pattern and a content pattern, not
   necessarily the same dimensionality (and perhaps not even in the same base field)

2. Each output neuron corresponds to a "bit" in the output pattern.

3. Each outgoing weight from an addressing neuron corresponds to a counter.
The total set of outgoing weights that connect to a given output node (bit)
might 



