THE ROUTING PROBLEM

What is "the routing problem"?  What problem does a network router solve?  A
network router receives packets of information.  For each packet, the router
reads the packet's destination address, and then sends the packet down one of
its output channels.

There are a few important differences between this form of routing and that in
a neural network.  First, the output channel connected to a router is serial.
The information packet consists of a binary vector, and it is communicated down
the channel in serial, meaning that there is only one line that can carry
state, and the sequence of zeros and ones must be carried one at a time, one
after another.

In the network router context, the N bits (positions 0 to N-1) in a network
packet must be transmitted at specific times 0 through N-1.  It is the timing 
which allows the receiver to decode the bit sequence back into the bit pattern.

In a neural network, I believe, a packet of information is not carried as a
temporal sequence of firings or non-firings along a single neuron.  Rather,
there is a designated group of neurons, each one having its own fixed identity
in the representation of a pattern within a family of patterns.  The
transmission of this pattern is accomplished at a particular time window by the
fire/no-fire pattern of this group of neurons within that time window.

In the router context, the packet is transmitted along one among several lines.
A firm decision is made: the circuitry of the router analyzes the address pattern
and somehow, without affecting any physical connections, sends the information
down one of the lines.

But, in the neural network context, what would be the equivalent "decision" or
routing that happens in response to inspecting an incoming pattern?  It doesn't
actually seem possible to have an N pattern, and then some mechanism for routing
it down one of two or more sets of neurons.

The addressing paradigm is an interesting thing to ponder.  In that case, the
input pattern activates a specific subset of addressing neurons.  This could be
seen as a kind of routing decision.


