HOW COULD ROUTING WORK IN THE VISUAL SYSTEM?

Let's assume that the visual system is composed of layers arrayed in 2D, and
that a cell in each layer has a limited receptive field.  The lowest layer
(rods and cones) cells each are explicitly mapped to a precise 2D location in
the visual field due to their physical position in the retina.  By virtue of
local connectivity, the next layer's cells have what is called a "receptive
field", which consists of a roughly rectangular local patch of area in the
visual field that affects its input.

This is true all the way to the top.  The connectivity patterns are fixed, but
the strengths of the weights may change.  The patterns of excitation cascade up
through the synapses.  This model can be interpreted as building complex
features from simple features.

We assert that the visual system achieves an encoding from a raw visual signal
that has both invariant and equivariant components.  We try to derive a system by
starting with the simplest case, pointing out shortcomings, and then introducing
solutions to these shortcomings.

A FEATURE IS EXPRESSED BY A SINGLE NEURON AND ITS INCOMING WEIGHTS

A visual feature is a pattern of colors in particular locations, (or light and
dark spots, if in black and white).  It can be thought of as a point in the
space of small images, such as a 3x3 image patch.  A simple neuron can be
trained to be an "address decoder" for such a point, and its bias adjusted so
that it responds to any pattern within a certain radius of the addressed
pattern.

So, this single neuron will fire with some strength.  By itself, it can
indicate simply whether a particular pattern is present or absent in its visual
field.

ONE-TO-ONE FEATURE REPRESENTATION ISN'T SCALABLE TO MANY FEATURES

If there are thousands of distinct patterns that must be discerned one from
another, the single-neuron model of feature detection isn't scalable, as it
would require one additional neuron for each new pattern and in each location
in the visual field, and the visual system has only a fixed number of neurons.

The solution seems to be to provide a fixed number of neurons for each
location, and to represent the many patterns in a distributed way.  Each neuron
represents a "basis pattern", and the thousands of different patterns are
composed as linear combinations of these basis patterns. 

So, now, the combination of firings of neurons for a particular 2D location
identifies the pattern among many thousands of patterns.

ASIDE: WHAT IS ROUTING?

In this note, the term "routing" has a very specific definition.  Before giving
it, note that there are two types of values in a network:  synaptic strengths,
which remain largely constant at inference type, and change on a slow time
scale, and neural activations, which change on a fast time scale and constitute
the information being processed.

From the perspective of a single neuron, it receives information from just the
subset of neurons connected to it upstream.  On the quick inference-time time
scale, the only thing that determines the activation of this neuron are the set
of activations of those neurons connected to it.

However, one could introduce inhibitory neurons that modulate the transmission
of signals from specific upstream neurons.  This set of inhibitory neurons
could serve as a component-wise mask at inference time.  It would serve the
same effect as zeroing out some of the synapses, but it wouldn't affect the
synaptic strengths, and it would happen at the short time scale.

From the perspective of the receiving neuron, this could look like "attention".
Now, if an upstream neuron connected to more than one recipient (i.e. if two or
more recipient neurons had overlapping receptive fields) then, this dynamic
filtering could look like "routing" in the traditional sense of "choosing a
route".  

It is known that receptive fields of neighboring neurons do indeed overlap, and
that there is lateral inhibition.  It is at least plausible that an upstream
neuron experiences something like a dynamic routing of its outputs.

WHAT PURPOSE COULD ROUTING SERVE?

Taking the perspective of the upstream neuron, what purpose could routing serve?
If this neuron is carrying a signal that represents presence of a particular pattern,
then, there may be some competition among the receipient neurons for its output.
If its output is only communicated to one among the group of recipient neurons, it
means that there is competition among the upstream feature detectors which one
needs it the most.

This seems quite plausible as a local feedback phenomenon.  A group of
recipient neurons initially receive excitatory input from upstream.  One among
those recipient neurons is getting the most excitation, due to its unique set
of inputs (although overlapping from the ones below) and it sends a laterally
inhibitory signal proportional to its excitation level.  (!!!)

I think I get it!



