A SCHEME FOR SEGMENTING SPEECH AUDIO

The scheme is very simple.  It consists of a set of static points, and
transitions between those points.  For instance, say the word "just".  It
can be broken into six distinct segments:

1.  The voiced sound in which no air escapes from the nose or mouth, but the
vocal chords are moving.  This is a very brief segment.  During it, the volume
of air that has passed through the vocal chords has nowhere to go, and fills
up.  If you try to extend this segment, the volume behind your tongue will feel
full.

2.  The sound which is a voiced "shhhh".  It consists of the vocal sound
combined with the sound of air passing through the small opening between the
tongue and roof of mouth

3.  The voiced "uhhhh" sound.  It has its distinct timbre (like all vowels) due
to the shape of the vocal cavity.

4.  The unvoiced "sssss" sound.  It has its distinct timbre from the shape of
the passageway between the tongue and roof of mouth, different from the "sh"
sound.

5.  Silence.  This occurs as the tongue touches the roof of mouth.  It may be
that, like step 1, during this step there is still air passing through the
unengaged vocal chords and pressure is building up behind the tongue.

6.  The 't' sound.  This is the only sound that is hard to segment into a
static sound.  The 't' sound is more characterized by its attack and rapid
transition in the white noise as the tongue opens up.


NOTES ON TRANSITIONS BETWEEN THESE STEPS

3-4:  This transition must tightly coordinate the beginning of the white noise
'sssss' part with the endint of the voice.  If the voice ends too early, there
will be an extra 'hhhh' sound.  If it ends too late, an extra 'zzzz' sound,
both of which will be noticible to the ear.


POSSIBLE CONCLUSIONS

If the majority or all spoken words are defined by these static points and
their transitions, it seems to imply that the duration of the static points
needs to be sufficient for the ear to identify them.  If they were too short,
there would be no way to distinguish between alternatives.  For example, there
is a lower limit in duration of step 3, "uhhhh" needed to distinguish between
the words "just" and "gist".  At some lower bound, it would be theoretically
impossible to tell.  Although, it is hard to demonstrate this to oneself merely
by trying to pronounce it -- the physical limits of human speech production get
in the way.

However, one could imagine artificially synthesizing such an utterance, and
shortening the duration until a human listener couldn't tell.  In any case,
my suspicion is that each of these points has a lower limit below which a human
listener cannot distinguish it from others.  Given this, it may be reasonable
to conclude that the largest of these lower limits among all static points in a
language (say, if it were 0.20 seconds), is the appropriate size of a receptive
field for labeling these.

